Multithreaded Process Manager Simulator

In this project you will implement a simulated process management subsystem in C using POSIX threads (pthreads) and appropriate synchronization primitives. Your program will simulate the internal behavior of an operating system’s process table.

For this task, processes are implemented as entries inside the PCB only, they do not represent actual, running OS processes. When the task asks you to create a process, you need to only create a suitable entry in the PCB. Likewise, when the state of a process needs to be modified, you only need to suitably modify the PCB.

The key idea here is that processes will be created, modified and terminated by multiple, concurrent threads. Thus, the process table to be managed will be a shared data structure on which the threads can concurrently act without any synchronization issues.
System Model
Your program simulates a simplified operating-system component responsible for tracking and managing processes. The system must include:
A Global Process Table
A shared structure that stores all active processes in the system. The process table should be able to hold a maximum of 64 simulated processes.
Process Control Blocks (PCBs)
Each simulated process is represented by a PCB structure containing at least the following information:

    • pid — unique process identifier
    • ppid — parent process identifier
    • state — current process state
    • exit_status — exit code if the process has terminated
    • list or collection of child processes
    • synchronization objects required for waiting/wakeup behavior

You may add additional fields if needed. 
Process States
Your system must define a small lifecycle model. The set of states are:
    • RUNNING / ACTIVE – process exists and is active; first state after creation via a fork
    • BLOCKED / WAITING – process is waiting for a child to terminate
    • ZOMBIE – process has terminated but has not yet been collected via wait by its parent
    • TERMINATED / REAPED – process has been removed from the system

You must clearly define the legal transitions between these states.
Process Management Operations
Your process manager must support the following operations:
Process creation
Create a child process under a given parent. This operation allocates a new PID, creates a PCB, records the parent-child relationship and inserts the process into the process table.

Function to implement:

pm_fork(parent_pid)
Process termination
Terminate a process and record its exit status. This operation changes the process state, stores the exit code and wakes any parent waiting for the process.

Function to implement:

pm_exit(pid, status)
Waiting for a child process
Allow a parent process to wait for a child to terminate. This operation blocks the parent if no child has exited yet, returns immediately if a child is already in the zombie state, retrieves the exit status, and removes the child process from the system. If waiting is done without a child, the function returns trivially.

Function to implement:

pm_wait(parent_pid, child_pid)

If child_pid = -1 is passed, then the process should wait for the first child that exits.
Termination request
Send a termination request to the specified process.

Function to implement:

pm_kill(pid)
Process table inspection
Produce a snapshot of the current process table in a clear, tabular format. The goal is to make it easy to see the state of all simulated processes at a given moment.

The output should include these columns:
    • PID – process identifier
    • PPID – parent process identifier
    • STATE – current state of the process
    • EXIT_STATUS – exit code (only if the process has exited, otherwise a hyphen)

You do not need to show the TERMINATED processes in this list.

Function to implement:

pm_ps()

Example output:

PID		PPID		STATE		EXIT_STATUS
----------------------------------------------
1		0      	RUNNING   	-
2    		1     	RUNNING   	-
3    		1      	ZOMBIE    	10
4    		2      	RUNNING   	-
Concurrency Model
The process manager is accessed by multiple worker threads. Each worker thread executes a sequence of operations defined in a task script file. All worker threads run concurrently and may perform any supported operation. Because the process table is shared, your system must correctly handle concurrent situations such as:

    • multiple threads creating children simultaneously
    • one thread waiting while another terminates a process
    • multiple threads interacting with the same process
    • one thread printing the process table while another modifies it

Your implementation must use appropriate synchronization primitives (mutexes, semaphores, etc.) to ensure correctness.
Worker Task Scripts
Worker threads obtain their tasks from text files that describe the sequence of operations to perform. Each worker thread is associated with one script file.

The main process manager program should be executed as:

./pm_sim thread0.txt thread1.txt thread2.txt

In this example:
    • thread 0 executes the commands in thread0.txt
    • thread 1 executes the commands in thread1.txt
    • thread 2 executes the commands in thread2.txt

Each worker thread reads its file line by line and executes the corresponding operation. The number of worker threads is defined by the number of script names passed in as command-line arguments. Any number of worker threads might be generated, depending on the number of command-line arguments. Threads should be numbered 0 onward irrespective of the text file names.
Process Table Monitoring
You have to implement a monitor thread that automatically prints the process table whenever it changes. The purpose of this thread is to observe updates to the process table and display a snapshot each time a modification occurs. This helps visualize concurrent activity in the system. 

You must use a dedicated monitor thread to wait until the process table is updated, print the current snapshot and continue waiting for the next update. The monitor thread should not continuously poll the process table. Instead, it should sleep until notified that a modification has occurred. You may implement this notification using any appropriate synchronization primitive.

Create the snapshot according to the output format of the pm_ps function described above. All outputs should be separated by newlines in a file snapshots.txt. An example snapshots.txt is provided below:

Initial Process Table
PID		PPID		STATE		EXIT_STATUS
----------------------------------------------
1		0		RUNNING		-

Thread 0 calls pm_fork 1
PID		PPID		STATE		EXIT_STATUS
----------------------------------------------
1		0		RUNNING		-
2		1		RUNNING		-

Thread 1 calls pm_fork 1
PID		PPID		STATE		EXIT_STATUS
----------------------------------------------
1		0		RUNNING		-
2		1		RUNNING		-
3		1		RUNNING		-

Thread 2 calls pm_exit 2 10
PID		PPID		STATE		EXIT_STATUS
----------------------------------------------
1		0		RUNNING		-
2		1		ZOMBIE		10
3		1		RUNNING		-

Thread 0 calls pm_wait 1 -1
PID		PPID		STATE		EXIT_STATUS
----------------------------------------------
1		0		RUNNING		-
3		1		RUNNING		-

Thread 3 calls pm_fork 3
PID		PPID		STATE		EXIT_STATUS
----------------------------------------------
1		0		RUNNING		-
3		1		RUNNING		-
4		3		RUNNING		-

Script Command Format
Each line in a script file contains one command. The following commands must be supported:
fork
Creates a new child process under the specified parent. The PID of the child should be the next available integer. You do not need to reuse the PIDs of the terminated processes. For example, the following command creates a child process whose parent has PID = 1:

fork 1
exit
Terminates the specified process and records its exit status. For example, the following command causes process 2 to exit with status = 10.

exit 2 10
wait
Causes a specified parent process to wait for a specified/unspecified child process. For example, the following command causes process 1 to wait for child 3:

wait 1 3

However, the following command causes process 1 to wait for the first child that terminates:

wait 1 -1
kill
Sends a termination request to the specified process. For example, the following command causes process 1 to be terminated:

kill 1
sleep
Causes the worker thread to wait for the specified milliseconds before executing the next command.

sleep 200

Two example script files are shown below:

thread1.txt
fork 1
sleep 200
fork 1
wait 1 -1
ps

thread2.txt
sleep 100
fork 1
sleep 300
exit 2 10
ps

Two threads will run concurrently and execute the commands in order, accessing the process table concurrently.
Program Structure
Your program should contain the following components:
Process manager module
This module is responsible for maintaining the process table, managing PCB structures, implementing process operations and coordinating synchronization. The process manager should also create an initial process with PID = 1, and PPID = 0. This will reflect the init process of the OS.
Script interpreter
This is responsible for reading script files, parsing commands and invoking the corresponding process manager functions.
Worker threads
Each worker thread receives one script file, reads commands sequentially and executes operations against the process manager.
Process Table Monitor
Specified above.
Expected Outcome
A correct implementation will demonstrate that your simulated process manager:

    • maintains a consistent process table
    • correctly tracks parent-child relationships
    • supports process creation and termination
    • correctly implements waiting and cleanup behavior
    • behaves correctly under concurrent workloads
    • creates and logs consistent snapshots 
Submission
You should submit a C file implementing the multithreaded process manager.

Mark Distribution

Script Interpreter	5
Process Table Monitor	5
Worker Threads	10
Process Manager	10
Viva	70
Total	100
Deadline
The deadline for the project is fixed on April 10th, 2026, 11:30 PM. Please use the provided Google Form link to submit your work. See the form for additional instructions.
